AWS CloudFront is a CDN with 216 points of global presence (edge locations), provides DDOS protection with Shield, AWS Web App Firewall. It basically helps with caching of content to edge locations close to the user for faster load times. CloudFront Origins are used in S3 bucket for distributing files and caching them at the edge, enhanced security with CloudFront Origin Access Control (OAC), which is replacing Origin Access Identity (OAI) and CloudFront can be used as an ingress (to upload files to S3). Also can be used for any custom origin (HTTP) backend like ALB, EC2, S3 (static website only) or any HTTP backend. OAC is used to protect the access control on the S3 bucket's contents + S3 bucket policies are modified as well for this security.

CloudFront is a global edge network where files are cached for a TTL (e.g 1 day), and are great for static content that must be available everywhere. S3 Cross region replication needs to be setup for each region where you want replication to happen, files are updated in near real-time, its read only and great for dynamic content that needs to be available at low-latency in few regions. the edge location will make request to the origin (EC2, ALB...) via AWS private network (very fast) but you would need to setup OAC for it. The default case would be cloudfront resolving the public dns or ip of the origin (ec2, alb...). Best case is to make cloudfront request to the public ALB, which makes request to the private ec2 instances. 

Cloudfront Geo restriction allows restriction on your distribution with allowlist which allows users from a country and blocklist which blocks users from accessing your content from a country. Country is determined by using a 3rd party Geo-IP database. Use case is copyright laws to control access to content.

CloudFront has price classes per distribution, Meaning the more edge locations your plan has the more expensive CloudFront would be. Three price class, Price class 100 (cheap and includes most of America and Europe), Price class 200 (optimal, includes america, europe, asia, africa, middle east), Price class all (most expensive and performant includes all regions like Australia, south america etc.)

CloudFront provides Cache invalidations, they are used if in case you update the backend origin, CloudFront doesn't know about it and will only get refreshed content after the TTL has expired. However, you can force an entire or partial cache refresh (thus bypassing the TTL) by performing the CloudFront Invalidation. You can invalidate all files (*) or a special path (/images/*) within the origin (e.g S3 static web)

AWS Global Accelerator is a AnyCast IP concept. Two anycast ips are created for your app which leverages AWS private network to deliever requests faster. Basically request is sent from the Anycast IP to the edge location and from there it goes to the origin (ALB, EC2, S3 web) using AWS private network. Works with Elastic IP, EC2, ALB, NLB, public or private. Consistent performance with intelligent routing to lowest latency and fast regional failover, no issue with client cache (because the IP doesn't change), leverages AWS Internal network. It performs health checks of your applications and helps make your app global (failover less than 1 min for unhealthy) and great for DR thanks to healthchecks. For security, only 2 external IP need to be whitelisted and DDOS protection thanks to AWS shield.

Difference b/w CloudFront and Global Accelerator is that they both use AWS global networks and its edge locations and both services integrate with AWS shield for DDoS protection.

CloudFront improves performance for both cacheable content (such as images and videos) and dynamic content (such as API acceleration and dynamic site delivery) content is served at the edge. 

Global Accelerator improves performance for a wide range of apps over TCP and UDP, proxies packets at the edge to applications running in one or more AWS regions. Good fit for non-HTTP use cases such as gaming (UDP), IoT (MQTT) or voice over IP. Good for HTTP usecases that require static IP address and Good for HTTP usecases that require deterministic, fast regional failover.