Amazon Rekognition is like Google lens, which allows us to find objects, people, text, scenes in images and videos using ML. It provides Facial analysis and facial search to do user verification, people counting. Create a database of "familiar faces" or compare against celebrities. Use cases are labeling, content moderation, text detection, facial detection and analysis (gender, age, range and emotions) face search and verification, celebrity recognition and pathing (ex: for sports game analysis). Content Moderation is an important point to note in Exam, it detects inappropriate/offensive/unwanted content and is used specifically in broadcast media, advertising, and e-commerce situations tp create a safer user experience. For this, you must set a minimum confidence threshold for items that will be flagged, flag sensitive content for manual review in Amazon Augmented AI (A2I), helps comply with regulations.

Amazon Transcribe automatically converts speech to text, uses a deep learning process called automatic speech recognition (ASR) to convert speech to text quickly and accurately. Automatically removes personally Identifiable Information (PII) using redaction e.g age, gender, SSN. Supports auto language identification for multi-lingual audio. Use cases are to transcribe customer service calls, automate closed captioning and subtitling, generate metadata for media assets to create a fully searcable archive.

Amazon Polly is the opposite of Amazon Transcribe, it turns text into life-like speech. Polly allows us to customize the pronunciation of words with "pronunciation lexicons", e.g Styled words: M0H1B => MOHIB or Acronyms: AWS => Amazon Web Services. Upload the lexicons and use them in the SynthesizeSpeech operation. You can generate speech from plain text or from documents marked up with "Speech Synthesis Markup Language (SSML)" - enables more customization, like emphasizing specific words or phrases, using phonetic pronunciation, including breathing/whispering sounds or using the newscaster speech style. Neural mode produces the most natural and human-like speech possible, while standard produces natural-sounding speech.

Amazon Translate is a natural and accurate language translation used to translate large volumes of text in websites or applications to a different language. Localize webs and apps for international users to translate large volumes of text efficiently. e.g Google Translate.

Amazon Lex (same tech that powers Alexa) has Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) to convert speech to text. Has Natural Language Understanding to recognize the intent of text, callers and helps build chatbots and call center bots. Amazon Connect receives calls, create contact flows, cloud-based virtual contact center. Can integrate with other CRM (Customer Relationship Management) systems or AWS and has no upfront payments, 80% cheaper than traditional contact center solutions. e.g you call a number in Amazon Connect to schedule an appointment, Lex streams the call from connect to understand the exact reason of call, than call a Lambda function to run some to code to schedule the appointment via CRM.

Amazon Comprehend is for "Natural Language Processing (NLP)". It is a fully managed and serverless service. Uses ML to find insights and relationships in text. It analyzes the language of text, extracts key phrases, places, people, brands, or events. Understands how positive or negative the text is and analyzes text using tokenization and parts of speech, Automatically organizes a collection of text files by topic. e.g analyze cus tomer interactions (emails) to find what leads to a positive or negative experience. Create and groups articles by topics that Comprehend will uncover.

Amazon Comprehend medical detects and returns usefil information in unstructured clinical text (e.g physicians notes, discharge summaries, test results, case notes). Uses NLP to detect Protected Health Information (PHI) - DetectPHI API. For it to work, store your docs in S3, Analyze real-time data with Kinesis Data Firehose, or use Amazon Transcribe to transcribe patient narratives into text that can be analyzed by Amazon Comprehend Medical.

Amazon SageMaker is a fully managed service for developers / data scientists to build ML models, Typically difficult to do all the processes in one place + provision servers. Machine Learning process (simplified): predicting your exam score. e.g you label historical data of years of experience to predict performance score for candidates and then build ML model with and train and tune the model as well with that data. Apply new data then and apply the model and it will perform predictions.

Amazon Kendra is a fully managed document search service powered by ML, Extracts answers from within a document (text, pdf, HTML, PowerPoint, MS Word, FAQs). Natural Language search capabilities. Learns from user interactions/feedback to promote preffered results (Incremental Learning). Ability to manually fine-tune search results (importance of data, freshness, custom ...) e,g is Datasource like Drive, S3, RDS, OneDrive or 3rd party APNs are knowledge indexed by Kendra so when user asks where is IT support desk, Kendra tells him at first floor.

Amazon Personalize is a fully managed ML-service to build apps with real-time personalized recommendations. e.g is personalized product recommendations/re-ranking, customized irect marketing (e.g user bought gardening tools, provide recommendations on the next one to buy) Same tech used by Amazon.com. Integrates into existing websites, apps, SMS, email marketing systems. Implement in days not months (no need to build, train and deploy ML solutions) Use cases are retail stores, media and entertainment. Personalize reads data from DS like S3, integrates data with personalize API in real-time and then deploys the personalize API for your website or apps as well as mobile apps, sms or emails.

Amazon Textract extracts text, handwriting and data from any scanned document using AI and ML, extracts data from forms and tables and can read any type of document (PDFs, images). Use cases are financial services (e.g invoices, finance reports), healthcare (medical records, insurance claims) and public sector (e.g tax forms, ID docs and passports.)

A company would like to implement a chatbot that will convert speech-to-text and recognize the customers' intentions should use Lex